AF-3589 Dart 2 migration guide (#210)
Workiva/over_react: doc/dart2_migration.md

# Dart 2 Migration Guide

- [Background](#background)
- [Changes Required for Dart 2 Compatibility](#changes-required-for-dart-2-compatibility)
- [Migration From Dart 1 to Dart 2](#migration-from-dart-1-to-dart-2)

## Background

As a part of the Dart SDK 2.0.0 release, support for transformers was removed and
builders were named the canonical replacement moving forward.

This library relied heavily on transformers to provide a developer experience
for building statically-typed React UI components in Dart with minimal overhead,
and we want to keep that promise moving forward.

If we set the migration process aside momentarily and look ahead to Dart 2, the
first takeaway is obviously that over_react needs to provide the same (or
similar) functionality provided by the Dart 1 transformer, but in the form of a
Dart 2-compatible builder. This process is not as straightforward as it may
seem, unfortunately, because the set of limitations imposed by the builder

> pattern is more restrictive than with transformers (for good reason). In

Author: Had the same thought this morning, I'll try to find a relevant blog post or readme from the dart team

allows the builder to generate the public, un-prefixed version that will be used
everywhere else.

```diff
  @Props()
- class FooProps extends UiProps { ... }
+ class _$FooProps extends UiProps { ... }

  @State()
- class FooState extends UiState { ... }
+ class _$FooState extends UiState { ... }

  @AbstractProps()
- class AbstractFooProps extends UiProps { ... }
+ class _$AbstractFooProps extends UiProps { ... }

  @AbstractState()
- class AbstractFooState extends UiState { ... }
+ class _$AbstractFooState extends UiState { ... }
```

In this example, the builder would generate the `FooProps`, `FooState`,
`AbstractFooProps`, and `AbstractFooState` classes with concrete getters and
setters implemented. The `FooProps` class generated by the builder would look
like this:

```dart
class FooProps extends _$FooProps with _$FooPropsAccessorsMixin {}
```

Doing this allows for inheritence of Props and State classes to function as
expected. Since the public version of the class is generated and includes the
concrete getters and setters _as well_ as everything concrete that was defined
in the `_$` version, you or someone else can simply extend it. No additional

> work by the builder required.

Reviewer: It would be extended by another private version of whatever it is, right? Maybe we can show an example?

> work by the builder required.

Reviewer 2: Consumers wishing to extend or implement a props/state class will extend from the publicly generated version, in their own private `_$` prefixed sub class. Example:
```
// super_class.dart
@Props()
class _$SuperProps extends UiProps {...}

// super_class.over_react.g.dart (generated)
class SuperProps extends _$SuperProps {
  // concrete implementations of props accessors
}

// sub_class.dart
@Props()
class _$SubProps extends SuperProps {...}

// sub_class.over_react.g.dart (generated)
class SubClass extends _$SubClass {
  // concrete implementations of props accessors
}
```

> work by the builder required.

Author: An example is a good idea, I'll add one.

### Props and State Mixins

Similar to the non-mixin Props and State classes, Props and State mixins will
need to be written with a `_$` prefix so that the builder can generate the
public, un-prefixed version that will be used everywhere else.

```diff
  @PropsMixin()
- class FooPropsMixin {}
+ class _$FooPropsMixin {}

  @StateMixin()
- class FooStateMixin {}
+ class _$FooStateMixin {}
```

This change looks like the same change as the one above for Props and State
classes, but the builder support behind the scenes is a bit different. This is
because Dart prohibits mixing in classes that extend anything other than
`Object`, meaning that the approach used above for Props and State classes does
not work for Props and State mixins. Instead of generating a public version of
these mixins that extend the consumer-defined version, the builder will generate
a separate class that implements the consumer-defined mixin. This generated
class will have concrete getters and setters implemented for all of the fields

> and any additional concrete methods, getters, and setters will be copied over.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and any additional concrete methods, getters, and setters which are defined in the mixin will be copied over to the generated class.
```

typed props factory implementation needs to be generated.

To work around around this, an alternative API for obtaining a component's
default props has been added:

```diff
- var defaultProps = new FooComponent().getDefaultProps();
+ var defaultProps = Foo().componentDefaultProps;
```

The `componentDefaultProps` getter returns the cached default props for the
component that the factory would eventually construct. One caveat: the getter is
typed as `Map`. If you need to obtain a component's default props typed as the
props class for that component, use the following utility:

```diff
- var defaultProps = new FooComponent().getDefaultProps();
+ var defaultProps = typedDefaultPropsFor(Foo);
```

## Migration From Dart 1 to Dart 2

Now that we've laid out the eventual destination, we need to explain how to get
there.

If you don't need to support a backwards-compatible migration path and just want
to get from Dart 1 to Dart 2 as quickly as possible, you have two options:

1. Update your code manually using the above diffs as a guide.
2. Use our [`over_react_migrate_from_dart1_to_dart2` codemod script][orcm-dart1-to-dart2]
   to automate the migration.

> If, however, you do need migrate your `over_react` code from Dart 1 to Dart 2

Reviewer: "need to migrate"

in a backwards- and forwards-compatible manner, you'll need to take a two-step
approach:

### 1. Migrate to the Forwards- and Backwards-compatible Setup

Use our [`over_react_migrate_to_dart1_and_dart2` codemod script][orcm-dart1-to-dart1-and-dart2]
to update your code to a state that is compatible with both the Dart 1
transformer and the Dart 2 builder. _In this state, you will notice some extra

> boilerplate and comments. This will be cleaned up in the second step, but is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
boilerplate and comments. This will be cleaned up when the transition to dart 2 is completed and we can pull the plug on dart 1 compatibility, but is
```

## Migration From Dart 1 to Dart 2

> _The over_react codemod tool is in the process of being open-sourced, but

> > until then the links below will not be publicly accessible._

Reviewer 3: 👍
